=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-wait - wait for desktop resource

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-wait> [I<OPTIONS>] [-c I<command and arguments>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xde-wait> is a simple C<C> language program that can be used to wait
for a window manager, system tray or pager before running a command or
exiting.

=head1 OPTIONS

The options that are detailed below are recognized by B<xdg-wait>.
B<xdg-wait> uses L<getopt_long_only(3)>, so unambiguous abbreviations
of long options and long options with a single dash are also supported.

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

The default is to wait for a desktop resource before exiting.  When any
of the following options are specified, the command mode changes:

=over

=item B<-c>, B<--command> I<command and arguments>

When specified, this option must be the last option on the command line.
Options processing stops abruptly at this option and remaining arguments
are considered to be the command and the command arguments to execute.
B<xde-wait> will L<fork(3)> and L<execve(3)> the arguments in a similar
fashion to C<sh -c>.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Prints usage information to standard output and exits.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Prints detailed version information and exits.

=item B<-C>, B<--copying>

Prints detailed copying permissions and exits.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

The following are more general options:

=over

=item B<--display>, B<-d> I<DISPLAY>

Specify the display to use (overriding the B<DISPLAY> environment
variable).  The default is the value of the B<DISPLAY> environment
variable.

=item B<--screen>, B<-s> I<SCREEN>

Only bind to the root window of the specified screen.

=item B<--nowait>, B<-N>

Do not wait for any desktop resource to appear.  The default is to wait
for a window manager to appear: this option waits for nothing but simply
backgrounds the command (or returns immediately if no command has been
specified).

=item B<--window-manager>, B<--manager>, B<-W>

Wait for a window manager to appear.  This is the default.  See
L<WINDOW MANAGERS> for the detection algorithm.

=item B<--system-tray>, B<--tray>, B<-S>

Wait for a system tray to appear before running the command or exiting.

=item B<--desktop-pager>, B<--pager>, B<-D>

Wait for a desktop pager to appear (or for EWMH/NetWM pager settings to
be set) before running the command or exiting.

=item B<--delay>, B<-w> I<MILLISECONDS>

The default is to wait indefinitely for a resource to appear before
continuing.  This option will only wait I<MILLISECONDS> before
proceeding.

=back

=head2 TOOLWAIT OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--toolwait>, B<-T>

Also wait for the application to launch before exiting.  This option can
only be specified when B<-c> is also specified.  Normally, B<xde-wait>

=item B<--timeout>, B<-t> I<SECONDS>

=item B<--mappings>

=item B<--withdrawn>

=item B<--pid>

=item B<--wid>

=item B<--noprop>

=back

=head2 CONFIGURATION OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-v>, B<--verbose> [I<LEVEL>]

Print diagnostic information to standard error during operation.  This
option can be repeated to increase the verbosity of output.  The default
level is 1.

=item B<-D>, B<--debug> [I<LEVEL>]

Prints debugging information to standard error during operation.  This
option can be repeated to increase the debugging level.  The default
level is 0.

=back

=head1 USAGE

The common procedure when starting light-weight window managers is to
start a shell task in the background that waits for two seconds before
starting applications like so:

    (
      sleep 2
      xtoolwait -withdrawn wmblob
      xtoolwait -withdrawn wmfire
      xtoolwait -withdrawn wmcalclock
    ) &
    start-fluxbox

This is not optimal and increases the amount of time that it takes for a
full desktop environment to start.  With B<xde-wait>, you would use the
following:

    xde-wait -toolwait -withdrawn -c wmblob
    xde-wait -toolwait -withdrawn -c wmfire
    xde-wait -toolwait -withdrawn -c wmcalclock
    start-fluxbox

or using a background process:

    (
      xde-wait
      xtoolwait -withdrawn wmblob
      xtoolwait -withdrawn wmfire
      xtoolwait -withdrawn wmcalclock
    ) &
    start-fluxbox


=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
