=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-places - pop-up places menu for XDE

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-places> [I<OPTIONS>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Provides a places menu for window managers that do not provide one
themselves or as a better places menu for those that provide an inferior
one.  The places menu is a menu of standard desktop locations as well as
user bookmarked places.  This is not a feedback mechanism, but is a
pop-up menu that can be used to display special and bookmarked folders.

=head1 OPTIONS

B<xde-places> accepts the following options:

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

When specified, the following options alter the primary operating mode
of the program:

=over

=item [B<--popup>, B<-p>]

Post a pop-up menu.  Depending on the setting of the B<--button> option,
this will either post the pop-up menu at the current pointer position,
or centred on the workspace (screen and monitor) to which it
corresponds.

=item B<--help>, B<-h>

Prints usage information and the current options settings and defaults
to standard output, then exits.

=item B<--version>, B<-V>

Prints the version of the program and a brief copyright statement to
standard output, then exits.  Parse the first line with L<awk(1)> to
obtain just the version number.

=item B<--copying>, B<-C>

Prints the long copying permissions statement to standard output, then
exits.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

The following options are general options:

=over

=item B<--display>, B<-d> I<DISPLAY>

Specify the display to use (overriding the B<DISPLAY> environment
variable).  The default is the value of the B<DISPLAY> environment
variable.

=item B<--screen>, B<-s> I<SCREEN>

Specify the screen number to use.  The default is either specified by
the B<DISPLAY> environment variable (when that variable specifies a
screen); otherwise, all screens will be considered.

=item B<--button>, B<-b> I<BUTTON>

Specifies the button that was used to invoke the pop-up.  Defaults to
zero (0).  This should be the button that was used to pop the menu.  A
window manager that invokes this command in response to a button press
should release its passive grab on the button before invoking the window
menu so that the popped up menu can grab the button.  A I<BUTTON> of
zero (0) means that the program was invoked with a key-press instead of
a button.

=item B<--timestamp>, B<-T> I<TIMESTAMP>

Provides the X11 server time-stamp of the event that caused the pop-up.

=item B<--which>, B<-w> {B<active>|B<focused>|B<pointer>|I<SCREEN>}

Specifies the screen on which to pop the menu.  The default is to
determine the which screen based on other options (such as B<--button>
option).  The option argument can be on of the following:

=over

=item C<active>

The screen containing the active client.

=item C<focused>

The screen containing the window with the keyboard focus (focused
client).

=item C<pointer>

The screen containing (or closest to) the pointer.

=item I<SCREEN>

A screen number (indexed from zero (0)) specifying the screen on which
to pop the menu.

=back

When unspecified, (which is the normal case), the default screen
selection algorithm is as follows:

=over

=item 1.

If B<--button> is specified and non-zero, select the monitor or screen
containing the pointer.

=item 2.

If B<--button> is not specified or is specified as zero (0), select the
monitor with the keyboard focus.

=item 3.

If there is no screen with the keyboard focus, select the screen with
the active window.

=back

=item B<--where>, B<-W> {B<pointer>|B<center>|B<topleft>|I<WHERE>}

Specifies the position for the pop-up menu.  This can be one of the
following values (case insensitive, may be abbreviated):

=over

=item C<pointer>

Place the northwest corner of the menu under the mouse pointer.  This
will always succeed.  This is the default when B<--button> is specified
and non-zero.

=item C<center>

Place the menu in the centre of the current monitor belonging to the
current screen.  The current monitor and screen is the monitor which
contains (or is closest to the location of) the pointer.

=item C<topleft>

Place the menu in the top-left corner of the work area (excluding panels
and docks) for the current screen.  The current screen is the screen
specified by the B<--display> or B<--screen> options, or the screen that
currently contains the pointer.

=item I<WHERE>

Place the menu at the location specified by I<WHERE>, which should be a
string containing a screen geometry that can be parsed by
L<XParseGeometry(3)>.  This is useful when the menu is launched from a
menu button in an external program and the menu should be positioned
adjacent to the button.  The geometry should be the geometry of the
widget against which the menu should be placed.  When the width and
height of the geometry are zero, it describes the point at which the
menu should be placed.

=back

When unspecified (which is the normal case), the default placement
algorithm is as follows:

=over

=item 1.

If B<--button> is specified and non-zero, place the menu at the pointer
regardless of the work area, monitor or screen.

=item 2.

Place the menu in the centre of the current monitor or screen.

=item 3.

Place the menu in the top left corner of the current work area.

=back

=item B<--verbose>, B<-v> [I<LEVEL>]

Increases or sets the output verbosity level to I<LEVEL>.  The default
level is C<1>.  Normal output is printed to standard output.  This
option may be repeated.

=item B<--debug>, B<-D> [I<LEVEL>]

Increases or sets the debugging verbosity level to I<LEVEL>.  The
default level is C<0>.  Debugging output is printed to standard error.
This option may be repeated.

=back

=head1 USAGE

To locate the menu under a button that was pressed in, for example, an
external panel, where the button has the geometry C<55x20+30+0>, specify
the C<--where='55x20+30+0'> option.  This will properly position the
menu under the button.

=head1 FILES

The following file locations are scanned for user-defined bookmarks:

=over

=item F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/bookmarks>

This is the location of a simple bookmark file used for the XDE (X
Desktop Environment).

=item F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/gtk-3.0/bookmarks>

This is the location of a simple bookmark file used by GTK3 and many
file manager utilities.

=item F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/spacefm/bookmarks>

This is the location of a simple bookmark file used by the L<spacefm(1)>
file manager.

=item F<$HOME/.gtk-bookmarks>

This is the legacy location of a simple bookmark file use by GTK2 and a
number of file manager utilities.

=item F<$XDG_DATA_HOME/user-places.xbel>

This is the location of the XML bookmark file that follows the
freedesktop.org L<Desktop Bookmark Specification> and is used by more
recent toolkits and applications.

=back

=head1 HISTORY

I wrote B<xde-places> primarily for the L<adwm(1)> window manager (and
variations of L<dwm(1)>) that do not support a places menu of their own.
Existing workspace menus associated with panels do not support the
special features associated with tagging and tiling window managers.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<getopt_long_only(3)>,
L<xde-ctools(1)>
L<xde-pager(1)>,
L<xde-winlist(1)>,
L<xde-keys(1)>.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
