=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-opacity - transparency options manager for the X Desktop Environment

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-opacity> [I<OPTIONS>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xde-opacity> is an transparency settings tool for the I<X Desktop
Environment>.  It can be used to set initial transparency settings from
a configuration file, or can launch a dialogue to interactively set
window manager transparency settings.  B<xde-opacity> runs as a daemon
and monitors for changes made by other configuration tools and log
changes to its configuration file.

The settings that can be set are those that are supported by a specific
extension to the I<NetWM/EWMH> specification.  This extension supports a
number of properties.  In general settings that can be performed are as
follows:

=over

=item I<Opacity by Window Type>

The cooperating window manager will first apply opacity by window type.

=over

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_DESKTOP>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_DOCK>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_TOOLBAR>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_MENU>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_UTILITY>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_SPLASH>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_DIALOG>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_DROPDOWN_MENU>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_POPUP_MENU>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_TOOLTIP>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_NOTIFICATION>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_COMBO>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_DND>

=item B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_TYPE_NORMAL>

=back

=item I<Opacity by Window State>

=over

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_MODAL>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_STICKY>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_MAXIMIZED_VERT>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_MAXIMIZED_HORZ>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_SHADED>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_SKIP_TASKBAR>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_SKIP_PAGER>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_HIDDEN>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_FULLSCREEN>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_ABOVE>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_BELOW>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_DEMANDS_ATTENTION>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_FOCUSED>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_FIXED>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_FLOATING>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_FILLED>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_MAXIMUS_LEFT>

=item B<_NET_WM_STATE_MAXIMUS_RIGHT>

=back

=item I<Opacity by Desktop Mode>

=over

=item B<_NET_DESKTOP_MODE_FLOATING>

=item B<_NET_DESKTOP_MODE_TILED>

=item B<_NET_DESKTOP_MODE_BOTTOM_TILE>

=item B<_NET_DESKTOP_MODE_MONOCLE>

=item B<_NET_DESKTOP_MODE_TOP_TILED>

=item B<_NET_DESKTOP_MODE_LEFT_TILED>

=item B<_NET_DESKTOP_MODE_GRID>

=back

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

=head2 SESSION MANAGEMENT OPTIONS

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=head1 SIGNALS

=head1 FORMAT

=head1 FILES

=head1 SPECIFICATION

The procedures followed by a window manager that support this
specification are described below.

A window manager supporting this specification will have the
B<_NET_OPACITY> and B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_OPACITY> atoms listed in the
B<_NET_SUPPORTED> property on the root window.  The B<_NET_OPACITY>
atom indicates support for this specification.  Window managers that
support this specification must also support the
B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_OPACITY> property as specified in the I<Composite
Manager Specification>.

A window manager supporting this specification will populate the
B<_NET_OPACITY> property on the root window.  The B<_NET_OPACITY>
property contents is an array of triples, where the first item in the
triple is an I<ATOM> representing the criteria; the second item is a
I<CARDINAL> containing the opacity setting associated with the
I<ATOM>; and the third item is an operator.  The cardinal value is
interpreted the same as the cardinal value of the
B<_NET_WM_WINDOW_OPACITY> property: that is, it is an opacity setting
between zero (0) and I<MAX_INT>: where zero (0) is completely
transparent; I<MAX_INT> is opaque.  The operator is an I<ATOM> and can
be one of the following:

=over

=item B<_NET_WM_OPACITY_MIN>

The applied opacity is the minimum of the calculated opacity and the
corresponding opacity setting.

=item B<_NET_WM_OPACITY_MAX>

The applied opacity is the maximum of the calculated opacity and the
corresponding opacity setting.

=item B<_NET_WM_OPACITY_ADD>

The applied opacity is the calculated opacity plus the corresponding
opacity setting (clipped at OPAQUE).

=item B<_NET_WM_OPACITY_SUB>

The applied opacity is the calculated opacity minus the corresponding
opacity setting (clipped at zero (0)).

=item B<_NET_WM_OPACITY_AVG>

The applied opacity is the calculated opacity plus the corresponding
opacity setting, divided by two.

=back

Only supported operations will be effected.  Operations that are
supported by the window manager must appear in the B<_NET_SUPPORTED>
property on the root window.

The client can set the opacity for any supported item by sending a
B<_NET_OPACITY> client message to the root window with the first 32 bits
of client data containing the I<ATOM> to change; the second 32 bits, the
I<CARDINAL> opacity to set; the third 32 bits, the I<ATOM> indicating
the operation; the fourth 32 bits reserved (set to zero (0)); and the
last 32 bits, the time stamp associated with the change.

=head1 COMPLIANCE

A number of window managers support this extension to the I<NetWM/EWMH>
specification, as follows:

=over

=item L<adwm(1)>

Full support was added to the L<adwm(1)> window manager.

=item L<blackbox(1)>

Full support was added to the L<blackbox(1)> window manager: however,
only the version available

=item L<icewm(1)>

=back

=head1 BUGS

=head1 HISTORY

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<NetWM/EWMH Specification>,
L<Composite Manager Specification>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>.

See B<--copying> for full copyright notice and copying permissions.

=head1 LICENSE

See the F<COPYING> file in the distribution or use the B<--copying> flag
to display copying permissions.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
