=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-run - run command dialog for XDE

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-run> [I<OPTIONS>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Provides a binary command and XDG application launcher command dialog
for running executables or freedesktop.org applications as though from
the command line using a graphical utility.

=head1 OPTIONS

Because GNU L<getopt_long_only(3)> is used, non-ambiguous abbreviations
and single dash long options are accepted; however, single flag short
options should not be concatenated.

B<xde-run> recognizes the following options:

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

Command options affect the major operating mode of the program.  Only
one of the following command options should be specified.  When no
command option is specified, B<xde-run> will assume normal operation is
requested and launch the run command dialog.

B<xde-run> provides the following command options:

=over

=item [B<--binary>, B<-b>]

Run the dialog as a binary command instead of an XDG launcher.
For B<xde-run>, this command is assumed if no other command is provided.

=item B<--xdg>, B<-x>

Run the dialog as an XDG launcher instead of a binary command launcher.
For L<xde-app(1)>, this command is assumed if no other command is provided.

=item B<--help>, B<-h>

Print usage information to standard output containing current defaults
and exit.

=item B<--version>, B<-V>

Print version information to standard output and exit.

=item B<--copying>, B<-C>

Print license and copying information to standard output and exit.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

General options do not affect the major operating mode of the program.
B<xde-run> provides the following general options:

=over

=item B<--recent>, B<-r> I<NUMBER>

Only show and save I<NUMBER> of most recent entries.  The default value
is 10.

=item B<--file>, B<-f> I<FILENAME>

When in binary command mode, run the command dialog with the specified
F<run-history> file.  In this case, the default is
F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/run-history>.

When in XDG launcher mode, runt the command dialog with the specified
F<recent-applications> file.  In this case, the default is
F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/recent-applications>.

=item B<--history>, B<-H> I<FILENAME>

Run the command dialog with the specified F<run-history> file.  The
default is F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/run-history>.

=item B<--apps>, B<-a> I<FILENAME>

Run the command dialog with the specified F<recent-applications> file.
The default is F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/recent-applications>.

=item B<--verbose>, B<-v> [I<LEVEL>]

Print extra information on standard error while running.  When
I<LEVEL> is not specified, simply increments the output verbosity;
otherwise, the output verbosity is set to I<LEVEL>.

=item B<--debug>, B<-D> [I<LEVEL>]

Print debugging information on standard error while running.  When
I<LEVEL> is not specified, simply increments the debug level; otherwise,
the debug level is set to I<LEVEL>.

=back

=head1 FILES

B<xde-run> uses the following files:

=over

=item F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/run-history>

The default location of the F<run-history> file.  This is a simple text
file with the commands that were last run using the dialog, one per
line, with the oldest entries lower in the file.

=item F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/recent-applications>

The default location of the F<recent-applications> file.  This is a simple text
file with the application ids that were last run using the dialog, one per
line, with the oldest entries lower in the file.

=item F<$HOME/.gtkrc-2.0.xde>

The location of the XDE theme file that will be used for the GTK theme
when it exists.  The program will also respect the C<_XDE_THEME_NAME>
property on the root window of the screen for which the program was
launched.

=back

=head1 NOTES

B<xde-run> does not perform its own XDG startup notification.
Instead, it uses the L<xdg-launch(1)> command to perform this function.

B<xde-run> and L<xde-app(1)> differ only in the default behaviour
(whether to run a binary command dialog or an XDG application launcher).

=head1 BUGS

B<xde-run> is quite stable, performs well and has no known bugs.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<getopt_long_only(3)>,
L<xde-app(1)>,
L<xdg-launch(1)>.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin:
