=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-preferred - launch or edit preferred XDG applications

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-preferred> [I<OPTIONS>] [I<APPID>]

B<xde-preferred-terminal> [I<APP_OPTIONS>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Provides an XDG preferred applications launcher and preferences dialog
for setting or running preferred applications.

When invoked as B<xde-preferred>, options are processed.  When invoked
as B<xde-preferred-I<type>>, all options are passed to the application
of type, I<type>.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

The program accepts the following arguments:

=over

=item I<APPID>

Specifies the application identifier of an XDG desktop application to
associate with an application type as a preferred application.  The
application identifier, I<APPID>, can be one of the following:

=over

=item 1.

the name of a desktop entry file without the F<.desktop> suffix (e.g.
C<gvim>); then name may contain a C</> if it is specified relative to a
user or system application directory, in which case it must not start
with a C</> or C<.>;

=item 2.

the name of a desktop entry file with the F<.desktop> suffix (e.g.
C<gvim.desktop>); the same restrictions as (1), abover, apply; or,

=item 3.

the full path (absolute or relative) and filename of a desktop entry
file (e.g. F</usr/share/applications/gvim.desktop>); the full path must
contain at least one C</> and start with either a C</> or a C<.>.

=back

Providing a non-option application identifier argument is mandatory when
the B<--set> option is specified.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

Because GNU L<getopt_long_only(3)> is used, non-ambiguous abbreviations
and single dash long options are accepted; however, single flag short
options should not be concatenated.

B<xde-preferred> recognizes the following options:

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

Command options affect the major operating mode of the program.  Only
noe of the following command options should be specified.  When no
command option is specified, B<xde-launch> will assume normal operation
is requested and launch the launcher command dialog.

B<xde-launch> provides the following command options:

=over

=item [B<--launch>, B<-l>] [I<TYPE>] -- [I<APP_OPTIONS>]

Launches the preffered application of type, I<TYPE> (see
L</APPLICATION TYPES>).  When I<TYPE> is not specified, C<terminal> is
assumed.  The type may also be chosen by executing F<xde-preferred-I<type>>,
where I<type> is the type of application to launch.  All options after
C<--> are passed directly to the application.

=item B<--set>, B<-s> [I<TYPE> I<APPID>]

Sets the preferred application type, I<TYPE>, to the application
identifier specified by I<APPID> (see L</APPLICATION IDS>).  When
I<TYPE> and I<APPID> are specified, the application is simply set and no
dialog is launched.  When unspecified, a dialog is launched to permit
the user to select applications of the various types.

=item B<--edit>, B<-e>

Launches a preferred application dialog to edit the preferred
applications for the user using a graphical interface.

=item B<--help>, B<-h>

Print usage information to standard output containing current defaults
and exit.

=item B<--version>, B<-V>

Print version information to standard output and exit.

=item B<--copying>, B<-C>

Print license and copying information to standard output and exit.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

General options do not affect the major operating mode of the program.
B<xde-preferred> provides the following general options:

=over

=item B<--category>, B<-c> I<TYPE> I<CATEGORY>

Overrides the category logic that B<xde-preferred> uses to locate
freedesktop.org applications.

By default, the categories are as follows:

=over

=item I<terminal> C<TerminalEmulator>

=item I<browser> C<WebBrowser>

The shared mime database is also used to determine the available and
preferred web browser.  The mime type used is C<text/html>.

=item I<mailer> C<MailReader>

The shared mime database is also used to determine the available and
preferred mail reader. 

=item I<filemanager> C<FileManager>

The shared mime database is also used to determine th available and
preferred file manager.  The mime type used is C<inode/directory>.

=item I<editor> C<TextEditor>

The shared mime database is also used to determine th available and
preferred text editor.  The mime type used is C<text/plain>.

=item I<screensaver> C<ScreenSaver>

=item I<mixer> C<AudioMixer>

=item I<player> C<AudioPlayer>

The shared mime database is also used to determine th available and
preferred audio player.

=item I<movie> C<VideoPlayer>

The shared mime database is also used to determine th available and
preferred video player.

=back

This option may be repeated.

=back

=head1 APPLICATIONS

=head2 APPLICATION TYPES

=over

=item C<browser>

=item C<terminal>

=item C<filemanager>

=item C<texteditor>

=item C<imageviewer>

=item C<pdfviewer>

=item C<screensaver>

=item C<audioplayer>

=item C<movieplayer>

=back

=head1 FILES

B<xde-preferred> uses the following files:

=over

=item F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/preferred-applications>

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<getopt_long_only(3)>,
L<xdg-settings(1)>,
L<xdg-open(1)>,
L<xdg-launch(1)>.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin:
