=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-launch - launches the user's preferred application

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-launch> [I<OPTIONS>] [I<APPSPEC> [I<FILE>|I<URL>]]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xde-launch> is a C<C>-language program that can be used to launch XDG
desktop applications by application id, category or mime type.  A file
or URL can optionally be provided.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

The program accepts the following arguments:

=over

=item I<APPSPEC> = {I<APPID>|I<CATEGORY>|I<MIMETYPE>}

Specifies the XDG desktop application to launch.  The application
specifier, I<APPSPEC>, can be one of the following:

=over

=item I<APPID>

Specifies the application identifier of an XDG desktop application to
launch.  The application identifier, I<APPID>, can be one of the
following:

=over

=item 1.

The name of a desktop entry file without the F<.desktop> suffix (e.g.
C<gvim>); the name may contain a C</> if it is specified relative to a
user or system application directory, in which case it must not start
with a C</> or C<.>.

=item 2.

The name of a desktop entry file with the F<.desktop> suffix (e.g.
C<gvim.desktop>); the same restrictions as (1), above, apply; or,

=item 3.

The full path (absolute or relative) and filename of a desktop entry
file (e.g. F</usr/share/applications/gvim.desktop>); the full path must
contain at least one C</> and start with either a C</> or a C<.>.

=back

=item I<MIMETYPE>

A registered mime type of the form "I<type>B</>I<subtype>".  This
corresponds to the mime type of a file or scheme handler that will
identify the application to launch.

=item I<CATEGORY>

An XDG menu specification category that identifies the application to
launch.

=back

Providing a non-option application specifier argument, I<APPSPEC>, is
mandatory unless the B<--exec>, B<--appid>, B<--mimetype> or
B<--category> options are specified. 

=item I<FILE>

Specifies the file name with which to launch the application.  This is
used in %f substitutions in the C<Exec> field of the XDG desktop entry
file or B<--exec> command line.  This may also be specified with the
B<--file> options.

=item I<URL>

Specifies the URL with which to launch the application.  This is used in
%U substitutions in the C<Exec> field of the XDG desktop entry file or
B<--exec> command line.  This may also be specified using the B<--url>
option.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<getopt_long_only(3)>,
L<xdg-settings(1)>,
L<xdg-open(1)>,
L<xde-open(1)>,
L<xdg-launch(1)>.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
