=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-wkspmenu - pop-up workspace menu for XDE

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-wkspmenu> [I<OPTIONS>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Provides a workspace menu for window managers that do not provide on
themselves or as a better workspace menu for those that provide an
inferior one.  The workspace menu is a menu of workspaces (now called
desktops) and windows.  This is not a feedback mechanism (such as
B<xde-pager(1)> or B<xde-winlist(1)>) but is a pop-up menu that can be
used to control windows similar to a task bar.

=head1 OPTIONS

B<xde-wkspmenu> accepts the following options:

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

When specified, the following options alter the primary operating mode
of the program:

=over

=item [B<--popup>, B<-p>]

Post a pop-up menu.  Depending on the setting of the B<--button> option,
this will either post the pop-up menu at the current pointer position,
or centred on the workspace (screen and monitor) to which it corresponds.

=item B<--help>, B<-h>

Prints usage information and the current options settings and defaults
to standard output, then exits.

=item B<--version>, B<-V>

Prints the version of the program and a brief copyright statement to
standard output, then exits.  Parse the first line with L<awk(1)> to
obtain just the version number.

=item B<--copying>, B<-C>

Prints the long copying permissions statement to standard output, then
exits.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

The following options are general options:

=over

=item B<--display>, B<-d> I<DISPLAY>

Specify the display to use (overriding the B<DISPLAY> environment
variable).  The default is the value of the B<DISPLAY> environment
variable.

=item B<--screen>, B<-s> I<SCREEN>

Specify the screen number to use.  The default is either specified by
the B<DISPLAY> environment variable (when that variable specifies a
screen); otherwise, all screens will be considered.

=item B<--button>, B<-b> I<BUTTON>

Specifies the button that was used to invoke the pop-up.  Defaults to
zero (0).  This should be the button that was used to pop the menu.  A
window manager that invokes this command in response to a button press
should release its passive grab on the button before invoking the window
menu so that the popped up menu can grab the button.  A I<BUTTON> of
zero (0) means that the program was invoked with a key-press instead of
a button.

=item B<--timestamp>, B<-T> I<TIMESTAMP>

Provides the X11 server time-stamp of the event that caused the pop-up.

=item B<--where>, B<-W> {B<pointer>|B<center>|B<topleft>}

Specifies the position for the pop-up menu.  This can be one of the
following values (case insensitive, may be abbreviated):

=over

=item C<pointer>

Place the northwest corner of the menu under the mouse pointer.  This
will always succeed.  This is the default when B<--button> is specified
and non-zero.

=item C<center>

Place the menu in the centre of the current monitor belonging to the
current screen.  The current monitor and screen is the monitor which
contains (or is closest to the location of) the pointer.

=item C<topleft>

Place the menu in the top-left corner of the work area (excluding panels
and docks) for the current screen.  The current screen is the screen
specified by the B<--display> or B<--screen> options, or the screen that
currently contains the pointer.

=back

When unspecified (which is the normal case), the default placement
algorithm is as follows:

=over

=item 1.

If B<--button> is specified and non-zero, place the menu at the pointer
regardless of the work area, monitor or screen.

=item 2.

Place the menu in the centre of the current monitor or screen.

=item 3.

Place the menu in the top left corner of the current work area.

=back

=item B<--verbose>, B<-v> [I<LEVEL>]

Increases or sets the output verbosity level to I<LEVEL>.  The default
level is C<1>.  Normal output is printed to standard output.  This
option may be repeated.

=item B<--debug>, B<-D> [I<LEVEL>]

Increases or sets the debugging verbosity level to I<LEVEL>.  The
default level is C<0>.  Debugging output is printed to standard error.
This option may be repeated.

=back

=back

=head1 USAGE

B<xde-wkspmenu> current uses F<libwnck+> or F<libwnck> both to identify
the window manager and to provide the window actions menu.  The range
and format of window actions provided by F<libwnck+> is superior to
F<libwnck>.  This use means that B<xde-wkspmenu> does not currently
provide any support for window managers that do not have a modicum of
compliance to the EWMH/NetWM specifications.  That may change in the
future.

=head2 WINDOW MANAGERS

B<xde-wkspmenu> provides a number of formats consistent with the use of
workspace menus in various lightweight window managers.  The formats are
as follows:

=over

=item B<--format=>blackbox

L<blackbox(1)> provides a workspace menu that follow a specific format.
This format mimics the L<blackbox(1)> workspace menu format.

=back

=head1 HISTORY

I wrote B<xde-wkspmenu> primarily for the L<adwm(1)> window manager (and
variations of L<dwm(1)>) that do not support a workspace menu of their
own.  Existing workspace menus associated with panels (and typically
provided by F<libwnk>) do not support the special features associated
with tagging and tiling window managers. 

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<xde-pager(1)>,
L<xde-winlist(1)>,
L<xde-keys(1)>.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
