=head1 NAME

xde-clip - Window Maker style clip for XDE

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-clip> [I<OPTIONS>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Provides a clip for window managers that do not support one and provides
a more consistent and rich experience for those that do.

=head2 FEATURES

B<xde-clip> has the following features:

=over

=item 1.

Provides a window-maker-style clip for applications.

=item 2.

Provides for the ability to control the theme of the clip following the
XDE theme.

=item 3.

Provides an XDG compliant menu for adding new clip applications to the
clip.

=item 4.

Permits the removal and reordering of clip applications in the clip.

=item 5.

Provides the ability to autostart clip applications when B<xde-clip>
starts.

=back

Rather than simply recreate the experience of the WindowMaker dock using
a WindowMaker, Blackbox or AfterStep style, B<xde-clip> performs some of
the functions of a launcher, a panel, and recent/frequent applications
list.

=over

=item 1.

Applications can be ordered in the clip by most recent (or current) use
(recent applications).

=item 2.

Applications can be ordered in the clip by the most frequent use
(favourite applications).

=item 3.

Applications in the clip can be restricted to those applications that
are currently running.  It may also be limited to the current
applications that are running in the current desktop or workspace.

=item 4.

The clip can be positioned in any of the 8 positions (NW, N, NE, E, SE,
S, SW, W) and with any orientation (horizontal or vertical).

=item 5.

If excess items in the list would make the list to long to be displayed
in a single row or column, the list can be scrolled in either direction
by using clickable arrow buttons.  The arrow buttons can be themed.

=item 6.

The clip will be expanded to fit the entire row or column when the
window manager is in a dynamic (e.g. tiled) mode, but shrunk to fit the
number of items it contains when no longer in dynamic mode.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

Because GNU L<getopt_long_only(3)> is used, non-ambiguous abbreviations
and single dash long options are accepted; however, single flag short
options should not be concatenated.

B<xde-clip> recognizes the following options:

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

Command options affect the major operating mode of the program.  Only
one of the following command options should be specified.  When no
command option is specified, B<xde-clip> will assume that normal
operation is requested.

B<xde-clip> provides the following command options:

=over

=item B<--quit>, B<-q>

Ask a running instance of B<xde-clip> to quit.

=item B<--help>, B<-h>

Print usage information to standard error containing current defaults
and exit.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

General options do not affect the major operating mode of the program.
B<xde-clip> provides the following general options:

=over

=item B<--verbose>, B<-v> [I<LEVEL>]

Print extra information on standard error while running.  When I<LEVEL>
is not specified, simply increments the output verbosity; otherwise, the
output verbosity is set to I<LEVEL>.

=item B<--debug>, B<-D> [I<LEVEL>]

Print debugging information on standard error while running.  When
I<LEVEL> is not specified, simply increments the debug level; otherwise,
the debug level is set to I<LEVEL>.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=head1 SIGNALS

=head1 CONFIGURATION

=head1 BEHAVIOUR

=head1 WINDOW MANAGERS

B<xde-clip> supports the full range of window managers supported by the
L<XDE(3)> suite.  It should work well on stacking, non-virtual root,
reparenting, EWMH/NetWM compliant window managers; however, not that
many window managers have issues in this regard.  Supported window
managers include:

=over

=item L<fluxbox(1)>

L<fluxbox(1)> provides a dock for dock applications (in blackbox style)
that it calls the I<slit>; however, it does not provide a clip.
L<fluxbox(1)> provides an internal panel that displays current
applications in a task bar.

=item L<blackbox(1)>

L<blackbox(1)> provides a dock for dock applications (in blackbox style)
that it calls the I<slit>; however, it does not provide a clip.
L<blackbox(1). provides an internal panel that displays current
applications in the task bar.

=item L<openbox(1)>

L<openbox(1)> provides a dock for dock applications (in blackbox style)
that it calls the I<dock>; however, it does not provide a clip.
L<openbox(1)> does not provide a panel, but relies on external panel
programs.

=item L<icewm(1)>

L<icewm(1)> provides neither a dock nor a clip.  L<icewm(1)> provides an
internal panel that displays current applications in the task bar and
will display a window menu during window cycling.  It also provides
mini-windows when configured to do so.

=item L<jwm(1)>

L<jwm(1)> provides neither a dock nor a clip. L<jwm(1)> provides an
internal panel that displays current applications in a task bar.

=item L<pekwm(1)>

L<pekwm(1)> provides a dock for dock applications (in blackbox style)
that it calls the I<harbour>; however, it does not provide a clip.
L<pekwm(1)> does not provide a panel, but relies on external panel
programs.

=item L<wmaker(1)>

L<wmaker(1)> provides a dock for dock applications (in WindowMaker
style) that it calls the I<dock>.  It also provides a clip.
L<wmaker(1)> does not provide a panel, but relies on external panel
programs.  It will; however, display mini-windows when configured to do
so.

=item L<fvwm(1)>

L<fvwm(1)> provides a dock for dock applications (in AfterStep style)
that it calls the I<wharf>; however, it does not directly provide a
clip.

=item L<afterstep(1)>

L<afterstep(1)> provides a dock for dock applications that it calls the
I<wharf>; however, it does not directly provide a clip.

=item L<metacity(1)>

L<metacity(1)> provides neither a dock nor a clip.  It does not provide
a panel, nor does it support mini-windows.  It will display current
windows during window cycling.

=back

=head1 HISTORY

I wrote B<xde-clip> because there were many supported window managers
in the I<XDE> suite that did not support a window maker application
clip.  Once written, it was apparent that a more rich experience could
be provided to users of those window managers that do support a clip (or
mini-windows).  B<xde-clip> was originally written in L<perl(1)>, but
was since ported to a C<C> language program primarily due to the lack of
X session management library support in L<perl(1)>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock <bidulock@cpan.org>

=head1 SEE ALSO

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
