=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-ctools - package of 'C' language tools for XDE

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Provides a set of F<libwnck++> based tools for use with various
lightweight window managers.  The tools provided by this package are as
follows:

=over

=item L<xde-app(1)>

Provides an XDG compliant application launcher command dialog for
running freedesktop.org applications as though from the command line
using a graphical utility.

=item L<xde-clip(1)>

Provides a clip for window managers that do not support one and provides
a more consistent and rich experience for those that do.

=item L<xde-cycle(1)>

Provides keyboard-based window cycling for window managers that do not
provide cycling themselves or for those that provide an inferior one.
The window cycling list is a list of windows on the current monitor (or
multiple monitors) and current workspace (or multiple workspaces) and is
accessed with a hot key.

=item L<xde-dock(1)>

Provides a dock (of WindowMaker dock apps) for window managers that do
not support one and provides a more consistent and rich experience for
those that do.

=item L<xde-keys(1)>

Provides generic key binding management for window managers that do not
provide key bindings themselves or for those that provide a inferior or
incomplete set of bindings.  Key bindings are hot keys bound to the root
window that invoke actions on windows, workspaces or the window manager.

=item L<xde-menugen(1)>

Provides a command-line program that can be used to generate an XDG
compliant menu in a number of formats to support configuration of the
root menu for light-weight window managers.  It is capable of generating
either a complete menu for a number of well-known window managers, or
for generating a sub-menu that can be included in the root menu of those
window managers.

=item L<xde-menu(1)>

B<xde-menu> is a command-line program that can be used to generate an
XDG compliant menu in a number of formats to support configuration of
the root menu for light-weight window managers.
It is a menu generator, system tray menu, and pop-up menu that
can be used to both generate XDG compliant menus for a number of popular
light-weight window managers as well as providing a system tray and
pop-up menu.

=item L<xde-pager(1)>

Provides desktop cycling feedback for window managers that do not
provide desktop cycling themselves or for those that provide an inferior
feedback.  The desktop cycling feedback is a pager where each cell
corresponds to a workspace on the current monitor (or multiple
monitors).  The feedback pop-up can also have a desktop selected using
the mouse.

=item L<xde-places(1)>

Provides a places menu for window managers that do not provide one
themselves or as a better places menu for those that provide an inferior
one.  The places menu is a menu of standard desktop locations as well as
user bookmarked places.  This is not a feedback mechanism, but is a
pop-up menu that can be used to display special and bookmarked folders.

=item L<xde-preferred(1)>

Provides an XDG preferred applications launcher and preferences dialog
for setting or running preferred applications.

=item L<xde-recent(1)>

Provides a recent files menu for window managers that do not provide one
themselves or as a better recent files menu for those that provide an
inferior one.  The recent files menu is a menus of recent (or favourite)
files or applications.  This is not a feedback mechanism, but is a
pop-up menu that can be used to access files or applications similar to
a file manager or application launcher.

=item L<xde-run(1)>

Provides a run command dialog for running applications from the command
line using a graphical utility.

=item L<xde-select(1)>

Provides window cycling feedback for window managers that do not provide
window cycling themselves or for those that provide an inferior
feedback.  The window cycling feedback is a selector where each icon
corresponds to a window on the current workspace.  The feedback pop-up
can also have a window selected using the mouse.

=item L<xde-setbg(1)>

Provides a per-workspace background changer for window managers that do
not provide any per-workspace backgrounds themselves or for those that
provide an inferior or incomplete set of background facilities.
Backgrounds are the image that is display on the root window.

=item L<xde-winlist(1)>

Provides a window list for window managers that do not provide one
themselves or as a better window list for those that provide an inferior
one.  The window list is a list of windows on workspaces with a sub-menu
of actions that can be performed against each window or workspace and is
normally access with a hot key, or by clicking on the root window, or by
pressing one or more modifier keys and clicking on a window.

=item L<xde-winmenu(1)>

Provides a window menu for window managers that do not provide one
themselves or as a better window menu for those that provide an inferior
one.  The window menu is a menu of actions that can be performed against
a window and is normally accessed with a hot-key, or by clicking on the
decorative border of a window, or by pressing one or more modifier keys
and clicking on the window.

=item L<xde-wkspmenu(1)>

Provides a workspace menu for window managers that do not provide one
themselves or as a better workspace menu for those that provide an
inferior one.  The workspace menu is a menu of workspaces (now called
desktops) and windows.  This is not a feedback mechanism (such as
B<xde-pager(1)> or B<xde-winlist(1)>) but is a pop-up menu that can be
used to control windows similar to a task bar.

=back

=head1 CAVEATS

Not all of the programs of the original B<xde-tools> perl package have
been converted successfully to "C".

=head1 HISTORY

Many of the tools in the B<xde-ctools> package were originally written
as perl programs in the B<xde-tools> package.  One of the problems with
using perl for various things X is that perl has no support for various
libraries such as ICE, X11 session management and startup notification.
These libraries are useful things for a desktop environment.  Therefore,
each of the utilities in the B<xde-tools> package were converted from
perl programs to "C" language programs.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<getopt_long_only(3)>,
L<xde-ctools(1)>
L<xde-app(1)>,
L<xde-cycle(1)>,
L<xde-dock(1)>,
L<xde-keys(1)>,
L<xde-menugen(1)>,
L<xde-pager(1)>,
L<xde-preferred(1)>,
L<xde-run(1)>,
L<xde-setbg(1)>,
L<xde-winlist(1)>,
L<xde-winmenu(1)>

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
