---
layout: default
---
Sample Screenshots
===============

[``xde-app``](xde-app.html)
----
Provides an XDG compliant application launcher command dialog for
running freedesktop.org applications as though from the command line
using a graphical utility.

<div style="text-align: center;" markdown="1">
![xde-app.png](/scrot/xde-app.png "Run Command Dialog")
</div>

[``xde-clip``](xde-clip.html)
----
Provides a clip for window managers that do not support one and provides
a more consistent and rich experience for those that do.

[``xde-cycle``](xde-cycle.html)
----
Provides keyboard-based window cycling for window managers that do not
provide cycling themselves or for those that provide an inferior one.
The window cycling list is a list of windows on the current monitor (or
multiple monitors) and current workspace (or multiple workspaces) and is
accessed with a hot key.

[``xde-dock``](xde-dock.html)
----
Provides a dock (of WindowMaker dock apps) for window managers that do
not support one and provides a more consistent and rich experience for
those that do.

[``xde-keys``](xde-keys.html)
----
Provides generic key binding management for window managers that do not
provide key bindings themselves or for those that provide a inferior or
incomplete set of bindings.  Key bindings are hot keys bound to the root
window that invoke actions on windows, workspaces or the window manager.

[``xde-pager``](xde-pager.html)
----
Provides desktop cycling feedback for window managers that do not
provide desktop cycling themselves or for those that provide an inferior
feedback.  The desktop cycling feedback is a pager where each cell
corresponds to a workspace on the current monitor (or multiple
monitors).  The feedback pop-up can also have a desktop selected using
the mouse.

[``xde-places``](xde-places.html)
----
Provides a places menu for window managers that do not provide one
themselves or as a better places menu for those that provide an inferior
one.  The places menu is a menu of standard desktop locations as well as
user bookmarked places.  This is not a feedback mechanism, but is a
pop-up menu that can be used to display special and bookmarked folders.

[``xde-preferred``](xde-preferred.html)
----
Provides an XDG preferred applications launcher and preferences dialog
for setting or running preferred applications.

[``xde-recent``](xde-recent.html)
----
Provides a recent files menu for window managers that do not provide one
themselves or as a better recent files menu for those that provide an
inferior one.  The recent files menu is a menus of recent (or favourite)
files or applications.  This is not a feedback mechanism, but is a
pop-up menu that can be used to access files or applications similar to
a file manager or application launcher.

[``xde-run``](xde-run.html)
----
Provides a run command dialog for running applications from the command
line using a graphical utility.

<div style="text-align: center;" markdown="1">
![xde-run.2.png](/scrot/xde-run.2.png "Run Command Dialog")
</div>

[``xde-select``](xde-select.html)
----
Provides window cycling feedback for window managers that do not provide
window cycling themselves or for those that provide an inferior
feedback.  The window cycling feedback is a selector where each icon
corresponds to a window on the current workspace.  The feedback pop-up
can also have a window selected using the mouse.

[``xde-setbg``](xde-setbg.html)
----
Provides a per-workspace background changer for window managers that do
not provide any per-workspace backgrounds themselves or for those that
provide an inferior or incomplete set of background facilities.
Backgrounds are the image that is display on the root window.

[``xde-winlist``](xde-winlist.html)
----
Provides a window list for window managers that do not provide one
themselves or as a better window list for those that provide an inferior
one.  The window list is a list of windows on workspaces with a sub-menu
of actions that can be performed against each window or workspace and is
normally access with a hot key, or by clicking on the root window, or by
pressing one or more modifier keys and clicking on a window.

[``xde-winmenu``](xde-winmenu.html)
----
Provides a window menu for window managers that do not provide one
themselves or as a better window menu for those that provide an inferior
one.  The window menu is a menu of actions that can be performed against
a window and is normally accessed with a hot-key, or by clicking on the
decorative border of a window, or by pressing one or more modifier keys
and clicking on the window.

[``xde-wkspmenu``](xde-wkspmenu.html)
----
Provides a workspace menu for window managers that do not provide one
themselves or as a better workspace menu for those that provide an
inferior one.  The workspace menu is a menu of workspaces (now called
desktops) and windows.  This is not a feedback mechanism (such as
``xde-pager(1)`` or ``xde-winlist(1)``) but is a pop-up menu that can be
used to control windows similar to a task bar.

[ vim: set ft=markdown sw=4 tw=72 nocin nosi fo+=tcqlorn spell: ]: #
